So, let's examine how our system uses swap, and then we'll also
investigate how the Out of Memory killer, or OOM killer, can be invoked.
This is on a Fedora 25 virtual machine.
So, you can see I have running on the left here a GNOME system monitor,
and the middle graph here is the one we're interested in, is about memory.
Not much is happening, of course, and it says I have 3.8 gigabytes,
I'm using 1.4. And then, it says of my swap I have a gigabyte here,
but I'm using zero of it.
So, I can get the same information here by saying "free -m",
and it's telling me the same,
I have a total of 3932 megabytes,
and I have 1019 in swap, of which 0 is being used.
Now, we have a little program here called "wastemem", which I should compile.
All this program does is it adds memory
one megabyte at a time up to a number given as an argument,
and then it waits 5 seconds, and then releases the memory.
So, it's just a way to tie up your memory.
So, let me run wastemem,
and I have less than 3 gigabytes free,
so let me ask for 3,000 megabytes.
Then, you see on the left here, it's adding one at a time,
and in the graph in the middle here, on the GNOME system memory,
the memory usage is going up.
When it uses all available memory,
it will start to use swap, and that's indeed what happened.
I wind up using about 400 megabytes of swap.
So, that's what I expected.
Now, I've released memory, so the memory usage is going down,
so that's all as expected.
But, let's see what happens if I turn off swap, and that's easy with
the command "sudo swapoff -a",
that will turn off all swap,
partitions and swap files on the system.
You can see over here, in the system monitor, it's gradually reducing the amount of swap.
It takes a little bit of time because it has to copy over
things from the swap area back into resident memory.
So, the memory use will go up a little bit,
and so it's almost done.
So now, I have no swap on the system.
That means if I try to ask for 3 gigabytes again,
it is not available and I can't spill over into swaps.
Let's try that again and see what happens.
You see now at 2617 is getting hung up, and everything disappeared.
So, what happened? The Out of Memory killer was invoked.
So, let's open up a terminal and try to see what happened here a little bit.
I'll just use a blue background, and I'll get a bigger font.
Well, I could investigate in detail, but let me just type "dmesg" and get kernel messages.
Let me make that bigger.
There's a long set of output before that. It runs through everything on the system,
it reports its so-called OOM score,
what the priority is,
with killing the thing, but you see here, out of memory.
It killed wastemem, that was the guilty party.
It was using all the memory and not doing anything useful.
It killed that, but it also killed the shell that was running in, as
well as the GNOME system monitor, which is being run in the same shell.
But now the system is healthy and running okay.
So, that's a demonstration of the use of swap, as well as
the functionality of the Out of Memory killer.